Hello, dear colleagues. My name is Svetlana Sterhova.
I have a degree in marketing in the MBA program of the Russian Academy of Foreign Trade.
My professional experience is 17 years. I have worked in both the industry and the FMCG market.
More than 50 consulting projects have allowed me to gain a lot of experience
both when forming a home network and when bringing new goods to the market.
Among my clients are companies like Motorola, Johnson & Johnson,
Accent Switzerland, Volga Telecom.
Today, the orientation towards clients is not just a fashion trend.
Today, clients put the price factor only on the 6th or 7th place.
What does it mean in practice?
In practice, it means that companies simply miss their potential profit
or they do not get it because they are mainly oriented to the price factor.
It is because we pay attention only to our clients, which are already in our company,
we do not see our potential.
And this has nothing in common with the management of our client base.
This applies only to the actual work with our existing clients.
In this regard, the topic of finding your client is very relevant today
for the development of the company, for the continuation of the market share,
even in the conditions of very tough competition.
Today, we will discuss a few topics that are dedicated to finding your client on the market.
The first is, of course, the topic of segmentation.
We will consider the main criteria for segmentation
and several methods that will allow you, depending on the specifics of your market,
to segment your clients and highlight the most important ones.
The next topic we will consider is the choice of the customer behavior model and its assessment.
How to see the process of choosing your product or service for your clients?
We will consider this on a practical example and see how it affects the results of your work.
And the next main point is, of course, the client-orientedness of the company.
We will consider the tests for client-orientedness,
see the main factors and the main points to pay attention to
when forming a key client base, when working with them,
and focus on the results you will get
if you think about how to work with your key clients.
Let's start with the market trends.
What do we see on the market today? What is happening today?
The first thing that is very noticeable is that foreign companies
are increasingly entering our Russian market.
Russia, together with other countries, such as China, India, Brazil,
are the fastest-growing countries today.
That is why we are being paid attention to by the world public.
What does this give us?
Of course, as consumers, we see a wider range of products and services.
But if we look at it from a business point of view,
we need to pay attention to the fact that if we do not focus on our client,
if we cannot serve him well and provide what he really wants,
we simply will not be able to compete in the market,
because the product itself becomes more and more standard, and even the service.
That is why we need to think about how to surpass our foreign competitors.
The next trend that is very visible is the export of products to developing countries.
Even in Russia, the labor force has become quite expensive,
and many manufacturing companies produce their own products in China,
because it is simply cheaper.
China is a global power that helps the world to produce products with lower cost
and, accordingly, to get a higher profit.
The next point is our industry, which has not yet risen from its knees
after the conversion that took place in the 1990s.
More than 70% of equipment has become outdated,
and, unfortunately, the state does not have the opportunity to completely renew the entire park.
What do we get from this?
Of course, an industrial crisis.
Although some industries, such as, for example, the steel industry,
are starting to rise by themselves,
that is, they invest in their own business,
other companies, especially large industrial enterprises, simply do not have the funds for this.
And, unfortunately, they cannot renew their equipment park,
and, of course, they do not have the opportunity to produce competitive products
with their own equipment, taking into account their own technical park.
Another serious trend is the limit of ownership in the especially developing markets.
Unfortunately, we depend on the influence of the state,
on the influence of politics and business,
while working with politics in such a serious relationship.
We depend on the legislation, on what is adopted at the highest level.
And, of course, for the state and for politics,
the most important interest is presented by those industries that are developing the most actively.
These are telecommunications, real estate, raw materials markets, and so on.
Naturally, so far, it is not very stable there,
although the profits are very high in these markets, and, in fact, the income is also high.
Another trend that is particularly pleasing is, of course, the active development of the medium business.
If we take the statistics of Western countries,
we will see that the medium business is the main, basic part, the basic stratum of society,
and only due to this country it is very actively developing.
Until today, the medium business has been very affected by various factors of the external environment.
These are the economy, politics, legislation.
Today, the government has decided to support the medium business,
and the medium business is slowly beginning to develop, to develop more and more actively.
And, in fact, we are striving for the same development that we see now in the West.
This is a very good trend that will allow our country to develop not only due to raw materials resources.
Well, since our market is actively developing, what are we doing?
Of course, we are expanding our sales channels, of course, we are looking for new clients.
But at the same time we make a lot of mistakes.
What are the main mistakes we make when we form our sales network, when we think about where and how to sell?
Well, the very first mistake that I would like to say is, of course,
ignoring where and why our clients buy our product or our service.
We think we know everything, we are experts in our market, because we have been working on it for a long time.
We sell our product, we present it, but in fact, we need to think more and more about where else we can buy our product,
where else we can present it, what other sales channels can be used.
Maybe there are not so many competitors yet.
The next serious mistake that we, as managers, always make, often make,
we think that all our sales channels, all our intermediaries, all our clients will be happy to accept our new product,
they will be happy to change for the sake of our offer.
But nothing like this happens in life.
It is always more difficult to sell new products, new products, new services.
You need to look for clients, you need to attract them, you need to convince them that our product is really worth their attention.
To this day, it has not yet come to us very well,
and we always stumble upon this, offering our product, our product ambitiously and in the form of resistance of our clients.
Of course, these moments must be taken into account.
Another important point, one important mistake.
We are always in a hurry, we have a very high rhythm of life, and we need everything quickly, today, or better yesterday.
And, in fact, for this reason, we do not carefully approach the choice of our intermediaries.
And this is due to very large losses.
After all, the cost of spending on an intermediary, on the search for a client, on his attraction, on his retention is very high.
And according to statistics, the client works out only a year later.
That is, all the expenses that we have incurred, we pay off only a year later.
Imagine if your client did not work out a year, but left after the first purchase, or after the second.
Consider that you have lost.
You have made some income, but you have lost in profit.
Therefore, it is better to approach the choice of your intermediaries very carefully at the beginning, at the first step.
This way, the image of your product will not be lost, and you will know exactly who you work with and under what conditions.
The next mistake is the lack of calculations.
Well, here, probably, the situation on the market is such.
Not all companies introduce a system of accounting, management accounting, which allows you to allocate expenses for each of the intermediaries.
And all this is considered the so-called boiler method.
Thus, we do not see which intermediary is beneficial for us, and which one takes away more resources from us than profits.
The next important point is that we do not make a budget as a client.
This is also mostly related to the financial service.
But the initiator, of course, should be either the sales director, or the commercial director, or the marketing director.
Because it is very important to calculate and control the costs that we incur on each channel.
That is, not just by fact, calculate and see.
We did not get profits, we got losses.
And to control this in the process, so as not to get big losses at the end of the year.
The next mistake, which we make just as often.
We do not want to give up the already existing channels of sales.
We say, we work with clients, we are doing well with them.
Well, what do they take, not so often.
Well, what do they add to our logistical expenses, or require an additional discount.
Nevertheless, we are afraid to lose those clients who are there.
And they are not always profitable.
If this client does not bring you profits, then have the courage to say no.
And find another client who will really be beneficial to you in your work.
The next point is when we develop only one channel of sales.
We focused on it and go with you.
On the one hand, this is great, such a strategy of specialization.
But on the other hand, we have very high risks.
What if this channel does not work?
What if it does not bring us the income that we expect?
Or will not give us such a profit?
For insurance, you always need to have a spare channel of sales.
Or develop two or three at once, at least.
In order to be more stable in the market.
Another important point is the conflicts in the channels of sales.
We should never avoid them.
Because sometimes our goals do not coincide, sometimes our interests do not coincide.
And this is normal.
But these problems still need to be solved.
By keeping them in silence, we push away from ourselves the important clients we need.
When you go to solve these problems,
naturally, the clients remain grateful to you and understand that you are a partner.
You are not just a supplier, but a partner.
And you are ready to solve the issues arising.
Two more points that need to be taken into account when forming a channel of sales.
The first is the support of personal relations with clients.
Relations with important people.
Relations with those who make decisions or influence the decision-making.
Because sometimes there are such gray cardinals in the company.
On which we do not go out and think why we need this.
We have a contact person, we work with him.
But we do not get the turn that we want.
Just establishing relations, very high-quality communication will allow you to solve this problem.
The second point I would like to say is very important.
It is the final in the list of mistakes, but not the last.
We just do not have a database of our clients.
Some companies already have CRM systems that allow you to control the work with key clients.
To have a full database, assess the situation, constantly control it.
But even in companies where these CRM systems are not installed,
the probability that the database of clients is very low.
Although it can be run without a CRM system, it can be run in ordinary programs.
The main thing is that everything is in electronic form.
The main thing is that it is constantly updated.
So that the database is alive, so that it is working.
So that additional data is brought in.
That's when the company gains stability.
Because leaving work, the manager takes with him all the knowledge about your client, all the contacts.
And the sales managers, as we know, tend to change.
Thus, the company undermines its stability if it does not control the situation.
Well, colleagues, let's move on to our topics.
Let's talk about the first topic, segmentation.
In general, market segmentation is a very serious trend.
I want to say that in the West, this method has been used for about 100 years.
And today there is even another trend.
The next is personalization.
That is, they do not just select market segments, but select key clients and individually start communicating with them.
We have not yet reached such a level of development.
That is, our market says that we need to select segments,
we need to determine target criteria for us and work only with those groups of clients that will allow us to realize the goals set.
We will consider the criteria for segmentation of the consumer market and the industrial market.
We will look at the difference and the methods that can be used to select your target segments.
Let's start with the consumer market.
The criteria for segmentation are probably known to you.
They are used very often.
There are at least three groups.
In fact, there can be more groups, but often three groups are used.
The first group is regional criteria.
Why are they important?
Because we care about the location of the region, its specifics, the number and density of the population.
Because it's great to offer your products when there are more clients.
Then the cost will be much lower per unit of the product,
than if we will deliver our product per unit to each client in different regions.
Therefore, the larger the population density, the more profitable it is for the company.
The transport network of the region is very important, because we need to be able to deliver the product.
If we talk about the availability of roads, the availability of the possibility of car transport,
we see that these problems have not yet been solved in our country.
Therefore, we have to use sea routes, air routes, railways.
Therefore, in order to reduce logistical costs, we need to understand how we will deliver the product.
Or maybe if the market capacity is very large, we should open a regional warehouse,
and then the costs will be reduced.
The segmentation criteria of the consumer market help you understand where it is more profitable for you to sell your product.
The next group of criteria is demographic criteria.
They are used very often and are used on almost all consumer goods.
The first is gender and age.
It is clear that there are men's and women's goods.
In general, the topic of women's and men's products is very interesting and is in fashion,
because it is one of the criteria when you can draw attention to one product.
This is one of the good ideas for promotion today, which works great.
Age is important.
One thing is when we sell to small children, another thing is when we work with pensioners or with the middle age.
Naturally, there are different needs, different interests, different requirements for the product.
Therefore, age also plays a very important role.
The next point that can be taken into account is the level of education.
It does not work for all goods.
For example, if we take books or software, this is a very important criterion to find your buyer.
Another point that can be taken into account is the profession of consumers.
The profession of consumers also sometimes plays a role.
It can also be a software, or maybe even a clothing market, or a food product market.
Because people working in the North can prefer certain things, certain products.
People working in the South can be completely different.
Therefore, it is very important to understand which criteria to choose and to segment your product according to them.
I want to say that not all criteria must be chosen.
That is, from the list that you have, you can only choose those that are really suitable for your product.
There is another group of criteria.
This is the lifestyle of consumers.
What do they mean?
Of course, these are social groups.
Schoolchildren, students, pensioners, workers, servants, and so on.
Here you can give an example of companies that deal with telecommunications.
For example, in Empel.com or MTS, they have very clearly defined tariffs,
which are intended for certain social groups.
Student tariff, for schoolchildren, and so on.
That is, they play this very well, just like that, by segmenting their consumers according to this criteria.
A few more criteria.
This is, for example, the frequency of use of the product, the degree of its use.
If you use the product often, then you are a more interesting buyer for the manufacturer or for the supplier.
Why? Because it will fail faster, break down faster, you will use it faster, and you will come for the next product a second time.
Therefore, of course, some manufacturers of products pay attention to those buyers who use their products most often.
This is also one of the criteria for segmentation.
Well, there are two more criteria that can also be taken into account.
This is the experience of use.
That is, if you have already used this trademark, this product, you already have some opinion.
And for the manufacturer it is great if this opinion is positive.
Thus, he practically acquires an adherent when you come for the same brand a second time, and you are interested in it, and you know it.
There will be no more surprises and discoveries for you.
You know exactly what you will take, what quality of product you will get.
Well, the category of adherents itself is those people who say,
I prefer only such a brand, for example, office equipment, or only such a brand of household appliances.
This is the gold mine of our manufacturers.
Because they do not need any preferences, any benefits, any discounts.
They will come and buy.
They follow the new products, they look at what is being produced, and, in fact, come for your products again and again,
knowing that you will not present any bad surprises.
Well, these were the segmentation criteria of the consumer market.
And what is the difference between the segmentation criteria of the industrial market, the B2B market?
I remind you that companies that work in the wholesale market belong to the industrial market.
That is, B2B is a business for business.
When we work with you for resale or for the use of our product or our raw material or our product in some of our products.
That is, it is not necessarily machines, equipment, it can be food products, it can be fabrics, it can be anything.
But if you work in the wholesale market, then you work in the industrial market.
Well, now about the criteria.
And the first criterion is a bit similar to the criteria of the consumer market.
These are the quantitative parameters of the segment.
Naturally, the more clients we have in this segment, the more profitable it is for us.
The next criterion that is important to consider is the availability of the segment.
What does this mean?
This means at least two things.
The first is physical availability so that you can get this product.
And the second point is availability from the point of view of entering this market.
Well, imagine if you participate in a tender for budget financing.
Obviously, the availability of this segment is not so easy, not so good to get there.
You need to get acquainted with the right people, you need to discuss the conditions under which you participate in the tender.
Maybe you will make some concessions.
Therefore, it will not be so easy to conclude this contract.
And in this case, the availability of the segment will have a very low point for you.
And you need to understand whether it is profitable for you or not, whether you need it or not.
And depending on the goals, there will be a result.
Are you going into this segment or not?
The next criterion is very important, this is the sustainability of the segment.
This is similar to seasonality.
Sustainability is when, for example, the product is produced for half a year, and for half a year nothing is produced at all.
There are many examples.
For example, the shoe cosmetics market.
It is not sustainable at all, because it is sold only in the fall and early winter.
And spring and summer are a dead season for this product, oddly enough.
Therefore, a company that produces such a product needs to look for some other product so that the production cycle is constant.
To work not only in winter and autumn, but also in spring and summer.
From this point of view, you evaluate how sustainable your segment is.
Will you be able to sell your product to these buyers constantly, throughout the year?
If you have a light seasonality, then the change in the volume of sales is slightly less or slightly more, depending on the time of year and month.
This is simply taken into account when planning sales and does not have a special impact on your business.
Profitability of the segment.
Of course, we look at how much we can earn.
And here again, we can bring in budget companies, or, let's say, financing from the budget and commercial companies.
For example, the medical equipment market.
If we look at the budget hospitals or hospitals, and commercial hospitals, who do you think is more profitable to sell the product?
In fact, the situation is very interesting.
If we go back 10 years ago, everything was obvious and clear there.
There was no money in the budget, and it was profitable to sell, of course, to commercial companies.
Today, everything has changed.
Money has appeared in the budget, and even if there are not so many of them, budget companies often do not look so seriously at the price of the product.
They look at the service complex, and so on, at some additional services.
But commercial companies, on the contrary, trade very well at a price.
Therefore, today, in terms of profitability, the budget market is much more profitable than the commercial market.
Therefore, look at what is in your goals, what you want to achieve, and depending on this, of course, choose a segment of work.
The level of competition.
Well, of course, each segment has its own number of competitors.
And here you just need to evaluate which segment has more of them, which segment has less, where are the large clients, where are many small clients.
And in the same way, set a point of attractiveness and choose a segment at the level of competition.
At the same time, it is necessary to understand that the higher the competition, the more costs you will incur in the fight against competitors.
This, of course, is not in favor of the company.
Well, the next criterion is the level of protection from competition, your protection.
What does this imply?
This is the presence of at least one competitive advantage.
That is, if you are at least somewhat different from your competitors, maybe you have an increased warranty, maybe you have a delivery service to your home,
maybe you offer something else to your clients, if you are at least somewhat different, you are successful, you already have protection from competition.
If you have a standard product or service, then you need to think about what to do, because you are unlikely to be able to perform well in this market.
You will not be able to position yourself, your product or service, qualitatively and competently.
And people will not understand why you need to choose your product, not the product of your competitor.
And the sales will be random.
The next criterion is the advertising capabilities of the company in the segment.
Well, such a criterion is as simple as advertising your product and product, how many different sources,
how many opportunities, and television, and press, and radio, and other media, and the Internet system, where only we do not advertise our product.
But here you need to clearly understand whether we can advertise our product where our clients are.
From this point of view, of course, you need to consider each segment.
The next criterion is the dependence of the segment on limiting goods and services.
What is it?
Is it a product without which your product simply will not work?
Like a car without gasoline, for example, or a printer without a cartridge.
That is, are there any things that need to be provided for your product to be purchased?
If there are no such deliveries in this segment, or the product does not arrive,
your task is to ensure the availability of these limiting goods and services so that your product sells better.
Well, the next criterion is the technological difficulties of working in the segment.
In fact, this is a very important criterion, and often we just do not pay attention to it.
But it happens that people simply cannot integrate their technology or production into our product.
For example, they do not have the equipment, or there are simply no specialists.
And all our products, our technology, our goods simply hang in the air,
because they do not have the opportunity to use them.
From this point of view, you need to think very clearly and very carefully how easy it is to use your product.
I will give an example.
Five years ago, hospitals began to equip very serious modern ultrasonic machines and ultrasonic scanners.
So, when these devices were put in hospitals, it was just such a technological difficulty of working in the segment.
People are just doctors, they did not know how to work on them, they did not know English,
they did not know how to communicate with computers, and the skills of working on a computer were very strong.
And the capabilities of this equipment were just great.
That is, an experienced doctor could detect a lot of different diseases and various things that occur in a person's body.
But due to the fact that they simply could not use the program, because it was, first, not russified,
and secondly, doctors simply did not have the skills, and hospitals could earn money on this as on additional services.
Here is your missed opportunity.
Therefore, of course, you need to clearly understand how your products will be used.
This is important today and very serious.
Well, dear colleagues, we have considered the criteria of segmentation, and now we turn directly to the techniques.
And we will start in the same way with the method of selecting target segments for the consumer market.
That is, this is a market where we work immediately for the end consumer.
You have a multi-factor segmentation model on the slide.
I will tell you how such segmentation is carried out, what results we can get from this model.
The first thing we do is, of course, identify the requirements of our consumers or wishes.
But these are not technical characteristics, but just the characteristics that they pay attention to when choosing your product or a similar product.
A selection is made, and a selection is not very large, it is 15-20 people who are customers or buyers of your product.
And you actually interview them on the subject of what characteristics are really interesting to them.
An example is given in the table for bicycle users.
When we all rode a bike, or when we were children, or when we were adults, such a product is known.
That is why the example is given for bicycle users.
Look, pay attention to what characteristics our clients chose when the survey was conducted.
The first is, of course, the technical characteristics, because it is important for everyone what size the bike is, the weight, what tires are on the wheels, etc.
What seat is there.
This is a standard set of characteristics that we pay attention to when choosing a bike.
The next point that our customers paid attention to is, of course, the price, which is also a factor that cannot be avoided.
Although it is not in the first place, nevertheless, attention is paid to it.
The next factor is special features.
This is the presence of various additional functions in the bike.
For example, a speed switch, or some additional braking system, or some special seat.
That is, this is all that can be done additionally to the bike, such a tuning, and make the bike the most comfortable for you to rest or train on it, depending on what is important to you.
The next point is reliability.
Well, so that it does not break at some point when we leave for 50 kilometers from the city, and then we will have to either carry it on ourselves or load it somewhere.
Therefore, reliability is important.
However, there is a very interesting dependence.
The more special features we have, that is, additional functions in the bike, the less reliable it is.
This is the law of physics.
But manufacturers try to find a balance to ensure reliability and equip the bike with some additional features.
The next point is the ease of use.
To make it simple to understand, you just sit down and go.
And do not read the technical instructions how to use this item.
Because the bike is a product that does not want to be fixed, how does it work.
And two more criteria that our buyers announced.
This is the brand's fame and the company's image, let's say.
And the design of the bike, that is, its appearance, how important it is.
In fact, we listed all these characteristics in this method.
And the next step that we took, we asked our developers.
These are the last two columns, which are on the left in the table, where we consider two models of the bike.
The models are hypothetical, they have nothing to do with the real models.
So, a tornado and a firecracker.
And we asked our manufacturers the following question.
Here is a list of consumer characteristics.
And now, please explain what you laid out during development.
What characteristics did you pay special attention to?
Please mark them with the letter A.
Mark the characteristics that were just important.
The second place that was left, mark them with the letter B.
And C, mark the characteristics that you did not pay attention to during development.
There is one subtlety here.
Developers always want to put A to all the characteristics.
Because their product is the best.
And this does not happen in life.
Therefore, the following requirements are to have letters A, B and C.
That is, you need to choose the most important things.
Just important and not necessary.
The next step that we carry out.
We begin to survey our segments of the main consumers.
Here are four segments that we can offer our bikes to.
These are athletes, professionals, schoolchildren.
These are people who lead an active lifestyle.
These are rural residents who also use bicycles.
Here is what happens next.
And then we ask consumers in each segment.
You do not need to choose a lot of people.
It can be 5-10 people.
Who will mark the importance of each of the characteristics that are here.
They also put letters A, B and C in each characteristic.
And then we get two profiles.
We start to compare them with you.
What do consumers want and what do manufacturers give us?
And so we find out what parameters we provide.
What our consumer wants.
And what we cannot provide.
And we choose the target segments.
Let's look at the example of professional athletes.
What did they say when we asked them a question.
About what characteristics are most important for them, what are the least important.
The most important characteristics for professional athletes were the following.
These are special opportunities and reliability.
Right, because they have intensive training, a very serious regime.
They need all these additional opportunities.
And of course it is necessary that the bicycle does not break.
So that it allows them to train very seriously.
The second place in importance they put the following characteristics.
These are technical characteristics and brand fame.
Since they are also interested in them.
This is the weight of the bicycle, its size.
And the trademark or the company that produces these bicycles.
For professional athletes this is a really important parameter.
All other parameters turned out to be unnecessary.
And they put a letter C on these criteria.
And now we compare with you.
What kind of bicycle is suitable for us, for professional athletes.
And what characteristics.
We compare profiles.
And we look, for example, we take the first characteristic.
These are technical characteristics.
And we, professional athletes, say that for us this is just an important characteristic.
That is, in second place.
We compare with what the manufacturers gave us.
And the manufacturers say that in Tornado it was a particularly important characteristic.
And they laid down very serious opportunities for it.
And marked with the letter A.
And here by Salyut it's just B.
Let's see if it matches what our clients want.
It turns out that it matches.
That is, we satisfy their requirements.
They said we want B.
And we have even more in one bike than they ask.
And in the second one it completely matches.
Therefore, we put two pluses for you.
Under the number 1 and under the number 2.
Under the number 1 is marked Tornado.
Under the number 2 is marked Salyut.
Let's go further on the characteristics.
The next is the price.
And at the price, our professional athletes put only C.
This is not important to them.
Therefore, we do not compare the profile here, but just skip it.
Because if it is not important to them, why should we compare?
The next feature is special opportunities.
And now we compare the profiles of our client and our developers.
According to special opportunities, the requirements are serious.
That is, this is a very important feature for clients.
It is marked with the letter A.
Let's see what the manufacturers have.
Tornado has the same A.
And the requirements match.
Therefore, we put a bold plus.
Salyut has the letter C.
We do not meet the requirements of our clients.
And we put a minus.
The next feature is reliability.
According to reliability, we also have the letter A.
Let's see what the manufacturers have.
Our manufacturers have B for Tornado, and A for Salyut.
Naturally, A is more than B.
Therefore, we do not meet these requirements for Tornado.
We do not meet them and put a minus.
But according to Salyut, all the requirements match.
Therefore, we boldly put a plus.
The next feature is ease of use.
For professionals, this is not an important feature at all.
Therefore, we also omit it and move on to the next.
And the next feature is the image of the company or the brand's fame.
And we remember and see that for professional athletes this is B.
This is important.
And what do the developers offer us?
Let's see.
The developers offer us A for Tornado.
They paid special attention to this.
And this is a well-known brand of a very good bike.
And C for Salyut.
They did not pay attention to this at all.
It turns out that we have a plus for Tornado,
because we meet the requirements of our customers.
And a minus for Salyut, because we do not meet the characteristics that they wanted and marked.
The next feature is design.
According to the design, the assessment was C from the side of the customers.
Therefore, we do not evaluate it in the same way.
What do we do next?
Let's sum up.
We add separately pluses and separately minuses.
And what do we see?
We see that Tornado has three pluses and one minus,
and Salyut has two minuses and two pluses.
Naturally, the more pluses, the more attractive the segment.
But, of course, the example can be simple.
We could say that Tornado is more suitable for professionals than Salyut.
But the whole point is that the method does not end there.
This is not only the selection of target segments
and the determination for which segment which product suits you best.
Yes, we chose Tornado for professional athletes.
But we see one minus there.
Let's ask ourselves a question.
Can we fix it to fully meet the requirements of our customers?
What is our minus?
And the minus is our reliability.
Can we do something with reliability?
In theory, we can give a task to the developers and say,
increase reliability so that we fully meet the requirements
that the client has asked for.
But, you see, when we increase or improve a quality characteristic,
it always affects the cost.
Considering that the clients have designated the cost as an optional characteristic,
it does not matter how much it costs.
We can increase the price, of course,
due to the fact that we increase reliability,
the price will increase,
and we will not lose the market.
But the price is still compared with the same characteristics of the products.
Therefore, we cannot jump very high for the price.
But sometimes there are moments when we simply cannot raise the price,
if it is not applicable to the bike, for example.
Therefore, we must think about what characteristic we can reduce.
Because the requirements of consumers are lower.
Why should we give more than they want?
They did not ask us for this.
So, what do we see here?
We see that we have one of the characteristics,
more than our customers wanted.
What is this characteristic?
The first is the company's image.
Because they said that it is important to them,
and we paid special attention to it.
Therefore, here we can think
whether we can produce such a bike under a different brand
and optimize the cost, increasing reliability.
And one more point that we can work on.
This is not only the company's image,
but also technical characteristics.
We say that we paid a lot of attention to this.
Maybe we can improve some technical characteristics,
and this will not affect the quality of the product,
but it will fully meet the requirements of our customers.
This is the value of the technique.
It not only allows you to select the target segments,
but also allows you to understand how to optimize your characteristics
to make the most valuable offer to the customer.
There are moments when you cannot do anything.
The product is already there, it is ready,
you are not its manufacturer, you just sell it.
Then the technique will help you to understand
what to focus your attention on,
where are your main advantages,
and just not to talk about your disadvantages.
This is how the whole advertising works.
Therefore, the technique is very valuable,
it helps to select the first target segments quickly and well,
and secondly, to understand what to focus on in advertising
and how to optimize our product to meet the requirements of our customers.
The next technique I would like to give as an example
is the technique of segmentation of industrial markets.
Here I will give an example of the roofing market.
A consulting project was carried out,
and this market was assessed very seriously,
in various regions.
What we did here, and how we carried out this technique,
I will tell you now.
The first thing to do is to choose the criteria
by which you will assess the segments.
In this case, the criteria were chosen together with the company's manager,
with its commercial director,
because who, as not the company's manager or commercial director,
knows well what they are focused on,
working in this area and in this industry.
That is, the criteria can be changed,
you can add or somehow correct,
it's all up to you.
The criteria are selected for the market.
What criteria did we choose here?
The first is, of course, the trend of market development.
Is the market growing, falling or stagnating?
This is important, because it provides an understanding
of how to develop further,
what to do next with your product.
The next criteria are the dynamics of sales on the market,
that is, how sales are going in each segment.
They can be completely different.
The next is the market capacity.
How much has been sold in this region,
in this segment in the past planned period,
for example, in a year?
The next is the long-term prospects.
How attractive will the market be in the future?
How seriously can we continue to work with it?
Or are these only short-term prospects?
The next is the demand for payment.
Is it growing or falling?
Yes, of course, many companies can want to buy our products,
but whether they have money for this is a question.
Therefore, the availability of payable clients is evaluated here.
The next is the attractiveness of the product itself.
Is our product interesting for these clients?
This is a very important point and is rarely evaluated.
In fact, it is important, because if another product is attractive for them,
then they will simply not be interested in ours,
and then our points will be very low in this segment.
Two more criteria are the influence of buyers and the influence of seasonality.
I want to note that the assessment here is done in reverse.
The stronger the influence, the less the assessment.
Because the stronger the influence of the buyer or seasonality,
the stronger we will have to adjust to this client and to the seasonality of sales.
This will not ensure our stability.
Therefore, the assessment here will be in reverse.
Another criteria is the existing retail network.
Imagine if you already have a retail network,
and it is very easy for you to sell to the same clients with whom you already work.
The cost is less, the resources are optimized,
it is easier to work, it is easier to present your product.
There are a lot of obvious advantages.
Therefore, if you have a retail network in this region or in this segment,
we will certainly give high scores.
Another criteria is the influence of substitute products.
I want to say that this criterion is not included in every assessment,
but since there is a specificity in the roofing market,
a lot of new substitute products come out,
which seriously reduce the attractiveness of the cipher,
which we evaluated for attractiveness.
That is why this criteria was included in this assessment.
What is done next?
We have determined the criteria.
We make a list of segments that we will evaluate.
This can be done very simply.
We take our client base and look at which groups our clients are from.
We divide them into groups.
And, in fact, there may even be someone from the potential groups,
where we want to go, but have not yet gone.
We can also put them here.
We choose segments.
There are several segments here.
This is industrial construction, commercial construction and rural construction.
We have designated all these segments in different sections.
We have also agreed with the commercial director.
And then we set the scores.
You have a column.
This is the maximum number of points.
If you pay attention, they are not even.
That is, it is not all 10 points, or all 12, or all 15.
These are just points, taking into account the weight coefficients.
The more important the criteria, the more points it costs.
This is the maximum that can be.
And then you evaluate each segment, each criterion.
You score.
I want to say that this is not just a mathematical game.
When we sat down, scored and got the result.
Before such segmentation is carried out, a serious market analysis is required.
This is really so.
That is, before scoring, we evaluated all these segments.
We carried out a detailed analysis.
And only after that, the points were scored in the form of an expert council.
These were managers who work in this market, sales managers.
These were marketologists.
These were people who conducted additional research.
And only on the basis of a common opinion, a point is set.
Because otherwise you will get a mathematical assessment with calculations that do not give real results.
I want to pay special attention to this.
That is, of course, research is required here.
When the points are set, we simply add up all the points for each column, for each segment.
We get the total amount.
And we see that the segments that scored the most points are attractive for us.
On the first table, on the slide, you have an example of the Moscow region.
This is, of course, an example for the cipher.
We evaluated the cipher, as I said, on the blood clot market.
In fact, the assessment took place in several regions.
And each of them had such a table.
And then everything was combined into a general final matrix.
And this matrix, you have it on the slide, there are 6 regions marked there.
We evaluated the Moscow region, the Krasnodar Territory, the Volgograd region, the Ulyanovsk region, the Republic of Mordovia, and the Sverdlovsk region.
These 6 regions were chosen by the director because there are cipher plants there.
That is, they were dancing from this, and therefore these regions were evaluated.
And here you see all the points that are combined for each of the segments.
What did we do next?
We highlighted those segments that are target for us in pink.
That is, these are the ones that scored the most points.
That's where the companies need to go first.
Everything that is slightly lower in points, in yellow, are additional segments.
When the targets are worked out, we start working on these segments, not earlier.
Everything else is cold sales.
If customers come from there, please, we will provide them with sales.
If not, we will not look for customers there, we will not spend on this segment.
Because it is a waste of resources, dispersion, and simply a failure to achieve the goal.
Because we are going to the wrong place, where we want to be seen.
I want to give a very serious example about cipher.
We often do not segment the market at all.
Why? Because it seems to us that it does not matter.
We sell to customers, we have these groups, we already know them all.
And why should we spend time on obvious things again?
Just in the example with cipher, we got an example from the cycle of obvious and incredible.
When we started researching the market, of course, we were mostly aiming at the Krasnodar Territory, Volgograd region.
Why? Because there is a very large number of private sector.
This is the first point.
And the second point is that the payment capacity of the population is not so high.
The third point is that cipher is very suitable for the seabed.
And in the Krasnodar Territory, of course, we have the sea.
So, it is not subject to corrosion, it serves for a long time.
And it is a wonderful material for these regions.
But when we made an assessment, you see on the table, there is not a single pink square.
There is not a single target segment.
We even had doubts, maybe we were wrong somewhere, or we did not finish something in this segmentation, or we made a wrong assessment.
We even organized a business trip again, we went to the region again to find out the situation, why this is happening, why no one wants to buy cipher there.
But the first thing we came across was that we looked through all the media that have been released in the last five years,
we dug into the libraries and saw a very interesting PR campaign that was conducted by Western colleagues, Europeans.
Europeans do not produce cipher, because they do not have an asbestos deposit, in which cipher is made.
But they produce other blood materials that behave wonderfully, are used very well, but they are simply more expensive than cipher, of course.
So, they conducted a very serious PR campaign there, about the harm of cipher to human health.
That cipher, exposed to the sun's rays and high temperatures, releases carcinogenic substances, settles in the lungs and leads to cancer.
In fact, there were opinions of experts, and so on, that is, it was a very large-scale campaign.
In fact, there is a harmful asbestos, there are two types of deposits in the world, but the asbestos, the chrysotile, from which our cipher is produced, is not harmful at all.
There are all certificates, all medical confirmations, and so on.
Nevertheless, the PR campaign was held, people thought that, in fact, the cipher is harmful, we will not use it.
However, the PR campaign never continues for five years, it is a maximum of two years.
Generations change, families change, people change, we understand this perfectly.
And we realized that there was another reason, not only that the PR campaign was held.
We went further, held a secret buyer auction, and, in fact, walked through the shops, through the markets where cipher is sold.
And when we just told the sellers that we needed a blood coat, we did not say what, we were offered anything except cipher.
Well, we noted this trend and, in fact, called them to talk.
An interview was held, and we found out the following moment.
When we asked, why don't you offer cipher?
They said, yes, you are what, cipher is harmful to health.
Well, then we started looking for a source, how did they know this, who actually told them this.
They could not remember this five years ago and repeat it all, the remaining five years.
We found out the following moment, that there is a university in the Krasnodar Territory, which teaches construction specialists.
And there a professor from Europe teaches.
And the subject of the blood coat is just this professor from Europe teaches.
And he tells all students that cipher is harmful to health.
He does not explain to anyone what cipher is, chrysotile or some other.
And, you know, the competition is at the level of the institute, at the level of students who are just being released into life.
That is, it already turns out that cipher is harmful.
Young people do not offer cipher, because they say, yes, you are what, you will die if you put it.
Actually, such a situation was found out.
This is the level of competition.
And this is a good example for us, at least, how to run a business.
But here, what decisions were made.
Well, the first one.
In the Krasnodar Territory, in the Volgograd region, there are two very serious cipher plants.
And they are not to be put anywhere.
Cipher transportation is associated with certain difficulties, it is fragile, it breaks.
And, of course, it was decided to sell cipher only to the industry.
Not to go out at all to end consumers, because it is pointless to break the logic of people.
It is impossible, practically, these are very large costs.
And in all other regions, you can already work with private clients.
Here, such a story happened, so I sincerely recommend you to carry out segmentation.
Find out where you have target segments, where they are not.
And not just fantasize about this topic.
Because it really gives a real result.
Well, dear colleagues, I want to offer you another method that is suitable for industrial markets.
Segmentation method with those criteria that we just considered.
Here are all the criteria that we listed for industrial markets.
This is the number of clients in the segment, this is the availability of the segment, its volume,
the dynamics of the growth of this segment, stability or influence of seasonality,
the level of competition and the ability to protect on this market.
Here I will give you an example on another market.
This is the elite alcohol market.
We chose 7 segments that we evaluated.
What were the segments?
The first is the wholesale segment, these are our dealers and distributors.
The second segment is retail networks.
Since they are doing a special job, of course, they are allocated to a separate segment.
The next three segments are retail stores, but they are all of different categories.
Category A means separate supermarkets, large self-service stores, shopping centers.
Category B is medium-sized and small self-service stores.
And category C is retail stores, small or maybe not very small, but working with retail.
Two more segments are wholesale.
Wholesale is different from dealers and distributors in that they buy from us unstable.
Today they can buy a very high turnover and, one might say, pull on the sales of dealers.
But it's not today that they made such a purchase, and tomorrow they may not come to us at all.
Dealers make a contract and must carry out purchases or sales with a certain periodicity.
Well, another segment is restaurants.
And what do you call it? Entree?
We chose seven segments for the assessment.
And I want to say that here, just as when you conduct an assessment, if you work in different regions,
then in each region the table will be different, because regions are very different from each other,
have their own specifics, so the assessment was carried out independently in each region.
The assessment was carried out as follows.
The assessment was set for each segment and for each criterion.
The maximum is 10 points, the minimum is 1 point.
The better the situation, the more points.
And the weight criteria were also involved here.
The weights are very simple.
It's 1, 2 and 3.
The higher the point, the more interesting this criterion is for us.
That is, we arranged the criteria and said that the most important thing for us is the number of clients in the segment,
the volume of the segment, the profitability and the level of competition,
because it all affects the financial result.
Then we arranged the criteria, which are of the second degree of importance,
and the least important criteria, we assigned them a weight of 1.
What was done next?
When you have put all the points, you multiply the weight by the point for each column,
then add it all up and calculate the average arithmetic.
What will you get?
As a result, you choose your target segments.
You can see that the most interesting segments for us are, of course, retail stores of category B,
networks, dealers and distributors.
But this is one of the regions where we conducted such an assessment.
On the next slide you can see a summary table for segments.
It shows in which segment which channels are the most interesting for us.
And, in fact, according to such an analysis,
you can very clearly build a strategy for the development of a company in a particular region.
As an example, you can see the results.
If we look at the regions that are presented here,
we can see that the biggest points were obtained by the channels of the restaurants.
The market for restaurants is very active today.
Moscow, St. Petersburg, Yekaterinburg scored the highest number of points in the restaurant segment.
The next segment is the segment of retail networks and distributors.
And if we take, for example, Lipetsk and Ryazan, we will see a completely different picture.
In Ryazan and Lipetsk, it is very good to work with dealers and distributors.
And the next one is the category C stores.
No matter how strange it is, we got such results.
And thanks to the fact that we saw where we needed to take action,
we developed the strategy of our company's actions for the next planned period.
When you have determined the target segments,
the next step you should take is to determine the consumer characteristics that are important for each segment.
Not all segments need to be determined.
The main thing is to do it for the target segments.
And we have an example here.
The consumer characteristics for the target segment are dealers and distributors.
Look what is there.
In the first place, of course, the price and discounts.
Naturally, a dealer and distributor earn money,
so financial conditions of the deal are very important for them.
And they always stand first in this category of customers.
The next places, importantly, took the expiry date of the order and the quality of the products.
Naturally, our distributor is responsible for the quality, and the expiry dates are just as important.
And you can see and look at the following characteristics yourself.
In fact, for each target segment, you have to do such things
in order to make commercial offers based on these things.
I would like to give you another example of segmentation.
This is the well-known method of automatic detection and interaction.
A very simple method, in fact, despite the complexity of its name.
When we just determine which segments can be our buyers, which are not.
And I will give you an example on consumers of electronic lighters.
Such a device is designed to ignite gas in gas stoves at home.
The lighter has its own features.
We have piezo-lighters that work on a piezoelectric element.
There are electric ones that plug into a socket and turn on.
And we can use them.
And here is an electronic lighter.
It is very convenient and interesting.
So we had to understand who our consumers could be.
And we, using the method of automatic detection,
have listed our main consumers.
We took all consumers of electronic lighters and divided them into at least two parts.
Who can they be?
The first is all the households that we have in our country.
And we divided them into two parts.
Those who have gas stoves and those who do not have gas stoves.
Of course, those who do not have gas stoves are not needed for analysis.
Next, we take the owners of gas-powered apartments and divide them by income level.
The income level is divided into three parts according to the statistics.
Low income level, medium income level, high income level.
And then we conducted a phone survey.
And you can see four groups of criteria here.
These were matches, piezo-lighters, electric ignition, which is built into a gas stove, and so on.
Someone found it difficult to answer, someone uses an electric lighter, someone uses a regular one.
That is, everything else that did not fall under these categories, it just got into this segment.
And we divided it by percentage based on the results of the survey.
You see that 69% of the population, the owners of gas-powered apartments, use matches with a low income level.
18% use piezo-lighters, and 11% use other devices.
In fact, the most attractive segment for us is piezo-lighters.
Why?
Because people who already use such devices can switch to a more attractive product.
And those who use matches will hardly buy our electric lighters.
Well, someone will probably.
This is a segment with the possibility of partial consumption, as we have designated it.
And the target segment is, of course, the piezo-lighter segment.
The average income level.
As we have divided it, look, the matches, piezo-lighters, electric ignition were divided approximately equally.
That is, people with an average income level buy new gas stoves that have a built-in electric ignition.
And, in fact, they were divided into approximately three parts.
If you look, you will see that in the target segments we have chosen piezo-lighters and electric ignition.
And you probably have a question, what does electric ignition have to do with it?
They already have it.
Why do they need your lighters?
The fact is that the plates here are not of the highest quality.
Electric ignition often fails.
And when it fails, to repair this stove, it is necessary to spend a lot of time,
the master invites, this stove is taken away, and so on.
That is, there are a lot of questions.
And people very often leave the stove as it is.
And they have to use something else.
That is, our piezo-lighters, or rather our electric lighters, will just fit.
Well, actually, with a high income level,
we see here that piezo-lighters take up only 22%,
and 58% is electric ignition.
And people who have electric ignition have not come here,
because the plates here are of high quality, they rarely break,
and they do not need it at all.
That is why we see everything that is marked in yellow is the target segments on the graph,
on our scheme.
Everything that is marked in blue is segments with the possibility of partial consumption.
That is, people can be switched.
This is how the automatic detection method of interaction works.
Any market can be marked.
In this way, target segments of the market can be segmented and allocated for themselves in the same way.
Well, dear colleagues, we have considered various segmentation methods.
And you have a very wide choice of which method to choose.
The only thing I want to say is that segmentation,
no matter how long it takes, always gives amazing results,
because it allows you to optimize resources and focus on your target buyers,
on those who really need and need your product,
and, of course, to achieve your goals that you have set for yourself for some planned period.
What is the role of segmentation in the purchase of products?
Next, we will consider the behavior of the buyer,
how it affects the purchase of our products.
There is a mixture of psychology, business, economics,
but nevertheless it is important to know, it is important to study our buyers,
to understand when, where, why and how they make our purchases.
Otherwise, we will never be able to provide them with what they really want.
Let's start with you to consider this topic from the types of buyer behavior.
There are four types of buyer behavior,
and we will take turns now to see what the difference is.
The first is complex buyer behavior.
It is characterized by the following things.
First, the buyer understands that he needs to buy something.
For example, this applies to some serious equipment.
For example, he needs to buy a computer.
He still does not understand the technical characteristics,
he does not understand what kind of ASU he needs,
how much memory he needs,
what processor should be with what frequency, and so on.
For him, these characteristics may be a dark forest.
He does not understand.
He needs a computer in order to perform certain functions.
In order to understand what kind of computer he needs,
he needs to understand.
Thus, he gets involved in the process of buying,
understands, begins to consider different options,
forms some attitude to the product,
and only then buys.
That is, a very long preliminary choice.
This is what characterizes complex buyer behavior.
Expensive purchases and very serious preliminary work on the choice of a product.
And only then buys.
The next type is a buyer behavior that smooths out the dissonance.
The name is very interesting.
What is it?
Here we also address expensive goods.
For example, furniture or expensive interiors.
What does the buyer do here?
Here he also walks around, chooses,
but he may not be particularly familiar with the technical characteristics,
because he pays attention to other things here.
Design, appearance, and so on.
He may also walk through the stores,
but he will still make a choice.
Most often, this choice does not last long.
That is, the buyer quickly looked through the possible offers,
made a choice, bought, and only then begins to understand.
It was necessary to buy another sofa,
because there are very rigid springs here.
Or maybe the material is very brandy,
and he doesn't like it at all.
Or maybe he liked everything,
and he is satisfied with the purchase.
That is, here he buys first,
and only then forms a relationship with the product.
Actually, this is exactly what you need to focus on
when your product meets such criteria,
such a type of buyer behavior.
The next buyer behavior is familiar.
These are everyday goods.
When we don't choose, we know what we need.
For example, we need salt or bread or sugar.
We come to the store, buy it and leave quietly.
That is, we choose what is on the shelf,
without thinking about the quality characteristics.
That is, everyday goods that do not require
a preliminary decision, reading articles, reviews,
what kind of salt should be, how it affects the body, etc.
That is, nothing happens.
Therefore, such a familiar buyer behavior.
The next point is a buyer behavior
that is focused on a wide selection of products.
Here we approach branded goods.
Let's take, for example, chocolate candies or juice.
And we know several brands of them.
Today we can buy one,
tomorrow another, the day after tomorrow a third.
Or maybe we are attached and buy only one brand.
But here, the same products are not expensive,
but still there is a low degree of involvement.
That is, we do not really understand
what makes one brand different from the other.
We react to external irritants
that the outside world sends us.
Advertising, the opinion of our colleagues,
our friends, family members, etc.
These are the four main types of behavior.
What are they for?
To understand how to approach the buyer,
what to offer him and what to draw your attention to.
What to draw the buyer's attention to.
With the first complex behavior,
when the buyer chooses, understands,
very serious consultations are important.
Maybe even a product demonstration,
how it works, what results it allows to get, etc.
Pre-preparation is very important here.
This is what your advertising campaign
or promotion campaign should focus on.
If we take the second type of buyer's behavior,
which smooths out the dissonance.
Your task is to smooth out the dissonance
so that the buyer, having bought,
can also inform you,
show the pros and cons of your product.
First, to make it easier for the buyer to choose.
And second, so that he can justify his expectations.
You need to tell more about the product.
If we take the third type of behavior,
this is the usual buyer's behavior.
There are various stimulants,
but in general, if this is a product for everyday use,
then there is no need for special advertising.
Because the product is already being bought.
As long as it is well put on the shelf,
well presented, and special effort is required
in merchandising and layout.
If we take the buyer's behavior,
which is focused on a wide selection of products,
here the marketing goods come into play.
Marketing goods are not sold without a wide promotion program.
You need to constantly support the brand,
constantly remind yourself
that the buyer chose your product according to the brand.
Therefore, there are serious companies for stimulation,
serious advertising investments.
Without this, you simply will not be able to survive
and work successfully on this market.
That is why we evaluate all types of buyer's behavior.
But this is a consumer market.
There are some peculiarities.
First, who buys a product?
Of course, organizations.
Organizations buy a product in order to get a profit.
Consumer characteristics are not so important for them.
They need to satisfy their needs.
Earn money, optimize costs
and fulfill the wishes of their next clients.
Another point.
When buying an industrial product,
several groups of people participate in the process of purchasing.
These are different units of the functional company.
Here, of course, you need to take into account
the interests of all units.
Therefore, you need to agree on all levels
when buying a particular product.
Another point that is very important
is that the people who buy your product
have certain limits in the company.
They must adhere to these limits.
Therefore, during negotiations,
these limits must be taken into account.
Another point that characterizes the purchase
on the B2B market is the signing of contracts,
pre-serious preparation,
documentation, bills, invoices,
pre-sales agreements,
and legal documents.
This is a very detailed process of the transaction,
which is not typical of the consumer market.
How do decisions on the B2B market
decide whether a buyer should buy a product or not?
A buyer goes through several stages
before making a purchase.
What are these stages?
First, we realize the problem, as everywhere else.
We understand that we need some additional components
for our production.
For example, we need to buy heating tins
for our thermal curtains,
because the tins that were not suitable for us in quality.
What do we do next?
We describe the characteristics
of the heating tins that we need to buy.
We evaluate the characteristics of the product,
compare what we have now
and what we would like to have
in order to better understand our needs and requests.
Next, we look for suppliers,
and there may be a lot of them on the market.
We collect offers from all suppliers
and then we have a meeting
and then we evaluate the products.
We have all the offers,
and we look for the best conditions,
the best quality, the best service, etc.,
taking into account all the restrictions
that we have for choosing a product.
Next, we develop a purchase procedure.
What do we need to do?
First, we conduct a test,
then we negotiate,
then we sign a contract, etc.
We describe the delivery and purchase procedures.
Then we make a deal,
buy our product,
and the final stage is the evaluation of the work of the supplier.
This always happens,
because the reliability of the supplier is very important in the industrial market.
If something does not work,
or is not delivered on time,
or is not at the right price,
or is not in the right conditions,
we can change it quickly,
because we have a lot of offers,
we have chosen them.
Of course, it is great to choose suppliers on all markets,
but there is always a choice
when you can change your decision
and make a decision based on the behavior of the supplier.
The model is just a description of the actions of the buyer
when making a purchase,
that is, how he acts, where he goes, what he thinks, where he buys, etc.
The model is very important for us
to determine the target groups of buyers,
to determine the model of their purchase,
and, in accordance with these models,
to offer our product to the market.
To determine the model,
we must answer 7 main questions.
1. Who are our buyers?
Who are the key ones?
This will help us to make a segmentation.
We will immediately understand who we are focusing on
in the consumer and industrial markets.
2. Are these products or goods that they are already buying?
There is no empty market at all.
Our client has already purchased something.
Now we offer him another product,
or an improved one, or at a better price, or with better service.
Therefore, we must understand
what is now in demand in the market,
what our buyers are aiming for now.
3. Why do they buy this product?
What are their goals?
What do they need it for?
According to the theory of consumption,
people, buyers, and clients buy products in two cases.
The first is to satisfy their needs.
We will see what they are later.
This is the first point.
And the second is to enjoy it.
There can only be two reasons
that make us do certain actions.
Satisfaction of needs and enjoyment.
4. What is the goal of the buyer when he chooses and looks for your product?
Who is involved in the purchase process?
This is also important to know.
As it happens, if we work in the industrial market,
there are a lot of participants
and a lot of decision-making levels.
Everyone needs to talk to everyone,
understand the tasks and goals of everyone,
and make a complex proposal that will suit all the levels of the company
that is going to buy your product.
Let's see if this is the end consumer.
Who makes the decision here?
Let's take a simple example.
When March 8 comes,
men buy flowers, champagne, sweets,
or when they go to visit a friend.
In theory, champagne or wine they buy for women.
But they choose.
What does the buyer do?
Or a case with a bicycle.
If you buy a bicycle for your son or daughter,
and your son or daughter are still schoolchildren,
of course, they will probably express their wishes to you.
What do they want to see?
What kind of bicycle do they want?
But you will make the decision, because you pay.
It is important to determine who makes the decision and who buys.
What is the process of buying?
What operations are carried out in the industrial market?
What is the sequence of actions?
How does the process of buying,
the process of choosing, the process of identifying,
that is, the identification of your product,
and the decision-making process take place?
The next question is when do they buy?
And why at these moments?
Is there a time, for example, morning or evening?
Is it associated with a holiday?
Is it associated with a season?
It is very important to understand when most of the consumers buy your product.
Because at this time you can make additional shares,
attract additional customers,
and increase your sales, of course.
And the last point is where.
At what trading points?
At what trading points and which customers
can your customers find their product?
In fact, this is a very rare question we ask ourselves.
It seems to us that we know all the sales channels.
But today juices are sold in pharmacies, for example.
Although this is not a grocery store,
this is an additional channel of sales.
In the same way, you can think about where else we can present our product.
Where else can we offer it or sell it?
Perhaps this is even a better channel of sales than the one we have today.
Because on our channel today we have a very high level of competition.
And if we go to some other segment,
maybe there we will look very good.
In the same way, many companies sell cosmetics in pharmacies
and position their brand as a therapeutic cosmetic.
Although maybe it has nothing in common with the therapeutic one.
Nevertheless, they position it as an elite product,
expensive, which is sold only in pharmacies.
And we usually have more trust in pharmacies than in stores.
These are the steps you need to consider
to determine the model of customer behavior.
When you describe each of these steps
to your target customers,
you will see how the purchase is going,
what your customers are focused on, what they pay attention to.
And it will be very easy for you to decide
how to work further, how to achieve your goals.
Before the customer makes his purchase,
he will think about many things.
Maybe he will compare something in his head.
Maybe he will consult with someone.
Because a lot of factors affect decision-making.
And we will look at four groups of factors
that have a particularly serious impact on our decision-making.
And the first factor is, of course, the cultural level of a person.
What is his social status?
Where did he grow up?
What did he get from childhood?
How did he get used to behaving?
What does he like and what does he not like?
Of course, a lot depends on this.
And maybe in his culture it is not customary
to consume certain products.
Accordingly, we will not offer them here.
Culture sometimes plays a role in this.
The next group of factors is social factors.
What does it mean?
Referendums, family, status of a person, his role in life.
We play a lot of roles in life.
We play different roles.
At work we have one role, in the family another.
With our parents we play a completely different role.
We are already a son or a daughter, although we are adults.
We are not a mother, we are not a father.
Therefore, we need each role.
In each role we make our purchases.
If we buy something for our children,
we buy it with one feeling.
If we buy something for our colleagues,
there may be completely different motives.
I want to say that everything that surrounds us,
all social factors, including referendums,
who are they?
Some famous people, media,
who tell us about a certain product
or show that they use it.
This affects our opinion.
Or a doctor recommends a medicine.
We listen to their opinion.
We listen to the opinion of our family members.
If it is so accepted in your family.
And we make purchases according to our role and status.
Such factors should be taken into account.
There are two more groups of factors.
The first is the personal order factor.
This is all that we imagine.
This is our age, this is the stage of our life cycle,
the stage of the life cycle of our family.
Either we are a young family,
or we have grown up,
or we have children,
or we have children who have already left the parental nest.
Different stages are described in sociology.
And of course, at each stage we make different purchases.
We have different needs.
And taking this into account,
we can offer our products to our clients in the same way.
Another group of factors is the factors of psychological order.
What do we mean by this?
What is our attitude to something?
What has already been imbued with us?
Or what do we imagine, what opinion do we have about this product?
If we know that a company produces a very good product,
and we are firmly convinced of this,
then we will buy it.
Maybe no one will convince us.
Or maybe we will have some kind of motivation.
When a company conducts some promotion campaign,
we will have a motive to try something new,
to move away from the standard brand that we always use.
These are our personal characteristics, our personal feelings,
our mood, even the moment when we make a purchase.
A lot depends on the mood.
Therefore, of course, these factors need to be taken into account.
But it is the factors of psychological order
that are most difficult to take into account.
It is difficult to predict a person's mood,
and it is very difficult to immediately understand what is inside him,
what is in his soul.
Therefore, the most complex group of factors,
nevertheless, the first three we can determine completely clearly
and even take them into account when segmenting our clients.
Let's see what the model of customer behavior consists of.
You have a diagram on the slide, which just describes all the factors
that affect customer behavior.
The first thing we will see is external irritants, as they are called.
These are marketing incentives.
What does this include? The product itself, the appearance, packaging, service, etc.
Its price, which tells us how much we should pay
to purchase this product.
Naturally, this is also an incentive for us,
if the price is attractive for us.
Next, where is it sold?
This is also an incentive.
If the store is very far away or the client is very far away,
I will do it in a different way and will not reach the manufacturer or the store
that would like to attract me.
Therefore, the location or the place of sale is sometimes very important
when choosing, especially the goods of permanent use.
This moment plays a decisive role.
And the promotion of the product.
These are programs that the manufacturer or supplier conducts.
These are ads, these are all articles,
which are published on the Internet.
This is a promotion, this is a promotion.
This is a promotion.
All this gives us a reason to remember about this product once again.
Maybe we should remember it when we come to buy something.
We remember the impact of advertising,
what we have missed on the price.
And we pay attention to a particular product.
As external irritants and as an incentive,
this is what we do when we buy.
Another group of motives is the incentive motive.
What is included here?
Economic, technological, political, cultural.
The factors that we have already discussed.
Economic factors.
What is included here?
Your ability to purchase this product.
How does it correspond to your situation?
Technical or technological.
How convenient will it be for you to use this product?
How will it suit you?
How will you deal with it?
Political motive.
I will give an example of a political motive.
For example, now we have a policy aimed at a healthy lifestyle.
Sport, skiing, tennis, etc.
Depending on what our politicians sell us.
And note, this also affects the quality of life.
Because more and more people are engaged in skiing,
more and more people are engaged in tennis, etc.
The policy of the state influences the decision-making.
Cultural.
What is accepted in our culture?
What do we like and dislike?
How were we brought up?
This also depends on the motive of our purchase.
When we look at the influence of all these factors,
we can consider the process of decision-making.
What happens?
First, as we said, a person or a company realizes the need.
You need to buy something.
This is necessary.
This makes you do it.
Either because there is a need,
or to get pleasure.
Next, we conduct a search.
Not only a search for a product,
but also for information about it.
Is it an expensive product or a product of a preliminary choice?
Then we evaluate the options we have.
We choose what we need and buy.
The last stage of the buyer's behavior
is evaluation and analysis.
What did we buy?
Did we like it or not?
How do we behave?
If we liked the product,
we go and buy it again.
Or we recommend someone to buy it,
if we don't need a second purchase.
But if we didn't like it,
we share our impressions
and don't recommend anyone to buy it.
This is a very important point,
because it's very important
to satisfy your client.
What decisions does the buyer make
after he or she buys your product?
There can be many decisions.
If he or she didn't like it,
he or she chooses other products,
other brands,
or he or she chooses another seller
because there can be different claims of the client.
Then he or she evaluates
how much time he or she needs to buy.
Even if he or she didn't like your service,
but it's easier for him or her to work with you,
maybe he or she will come back to you
only because he or she will save his or her time.
And, of course, he or she will evaluate the cost of the purchase.
And not only the price of the purchase,
but also the cost of the whole purchase.
For example, when you buy an air conditioner at home
or in a company,
the cost of the equipment is the same.
Then the cost of the installation is added.
This is an additional cost.
And then the cost of service is added.
The same is true for your cars.
We buy a car,
we pay for the service,
we pay for additional parts,
we pay for repairs, for gasoline, etc.
The client always evaluates the total cost of the purchase.
Whether we want it or not.
Therefore, it is very difficult to attract the client
with the initial small price.
The client is already very competent in consumption
and evaluates the total cost of the purchase.
Because they have a limit,
they have clear instructions
what the price of the product should be
and what its cost of service should be.
Therefore, the model must be taken into account.
It is important and it gives you the opportunity
to see your customers in more detail, more clearly.
And I want to say again,
offer them the product they really need.